📝 PHP Language page rework (#2271)
platformsh/platformsh-docs: docs/src/languages/php/xdebug.md

sidebarTitle: "Xdebug"
---

[Xdebug](https://xdebug.org/) is a real-time debugger extension for PHP.
While usually used for local development, it can also be helpful for debugging aberrant behavior on the server.
It's available on Platform.sh Grid instances running PHP 7.2 and higher.

As configured on Platform.sh, it avoids any runtime overhead for non-debug requests, even in production, and only allows connections via SSH tunnels to avoid any security issues.

Note Xdebug runs only on your app containers.
So you can't use it for [worker containers](../../create-apps/workers.md).

## Before you begin

You need to have:

- PHP 7.2+ on your project
- The Platform.sh [CLI](../../development/cli/_index.md)

> - Have a Xdebug-compatible IDE installed on your machine.

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
- A Xdebug-compatible IDE installed on your machine
```

>     For setup instructions, consult your IDE's Xdebug documentation.
>     Optionally, you can use [PHPStorm](https://www.jetbrains.com/phpstorm/), for which detailed instructions are provided.

Reviewer: :clipboard:
```suggestion

    For setup instructions, consult your IDE's Xdebug documentation.
  Optionally, you can use [PHPStorm](https://www.jetbrains.com/phpstorm/), for which detailed instructions are provided.
```

```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
runtime:
    xdebug:
        idekey: PHPSTORM
```

The `idekey` value can be any arbitrary alphanumeric string.

When that key is defined, Platform.sh starts a second PHP-FPM process on the container that's identically configured but also has Xdebug enabled.
Only incoming requests that have an Xdebug cookie or query parameter set are forwarded to the debug PHP-FPM process.
All other requests are directed to the normal PHP-FPM process and thus have no performance impact.

If you have enabled the [router cache](../../define-routes/cache.md),
you need to explicitly add the Xdebug cookie (`XDEBUG_SESSION`) to the cookie allowlist.
Depending on the cookies already listed, the result should look similar to the following:

```yaml {location=".platform/routes.yaml"}
"https://{default}/":
    # ...
    cache:
        enabled: true
        cookies: ['/^SS?ESS/', 'XDEBUG_SESSION']
```

Xdebug has numerous configuration options available.
They can be set the same way as any other [PHP setting](./_index.md#php-settings).
For a full list of available options, consult the [Xdebug documentation](https://xdebug.org/docs/).

## 2. Use Xdebug

> ### Open a tunnel

Reviewer: :lady_beetle: The substeps for step 3 have numbers while these don't. It should be consistent. I'd go either unnumbered or letters, as in: https://developers.google.com/style/procedures#sublists

From a local checkout of your app,
run `platform environment:xdebug` (or just `platform xdebug`) to open an SSH tunnel to the server.
That SSH tunnel allows your IDE and the server to communicate debug information securely.

By default, Xdebug operates on port 9003.
Generally, it's best to configure your IDE to use that port.
To use an alternate port, use the `--port` flag.

To close the tunnel and terminate the debug connection, press `Ctrl-C`.

{{< note title="On Dedicated Generation 3" >}}
Note that because you have several VMs running but your tunnel is connected to only one of them,
your requests don't always reach the same host.
{{< /note >}}

### Install an Xdebug helper

While Xdebug can be triggered from the browser by adding a special query parameter, the preferred way is to use a browser plugin helper.
Helpers are available for [Firefox](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/xdebug-helper-for-firefox/)
and [Chrome](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/xdebug-helper/eadndfjplgieldjbigjakmdgkmoaaaoc).
Their respective plugin pages document how to trigger them when needed.

> ## 3. (Optional) Use PHPStorm

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
## 3. Optional: Use PHPStorm
```

sidebarTitle: "Xdebug"
---

[Xdebug](https://xdebug.org/) is a real-time debugger extension for PHP.
While usually used for local development, it can also be helpful for debugging aberrant behavior on the server.
It's available on Platform.sh Grid instances running PHP 7.2 and higher.

As configured on Platform.sh, it avoids any runtime overhead for non-debug requests, even in production, and only allows connections via SSH tunnels to avoid any security issues.

Note Xdebug runs only on your app containers.
So you can't use it for [worker containers](../../create-apps/workers.md).

## Before you begin

You need to have:

- PHP 7.2+ on your project

> - The platform [CLI](../../development/cli/_index.md)

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
- The Platform.sh [CLI](../../development/cli/_index.md)
```

> - Have [PHPStorm](https://www.jetbrains.com/phpstorm/) installed on your machine. Any Xdebug compatible IDE should work too, but the setup instructions differ. Consult your IDE's Xdebug documentation for setup instructions.

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
- [PHPStorm](https://www.jetbrains.com/phpstorm/) installed on your machine.
  Other Xdebug-compatible IDEs should work too, but the setup instructions differ.
  For setup instructions, consult your IDE's Xdebug documentation.
```

Reviewer: Below PHPStorm is marked as optional, so probably something similar here, too

## 1. Set up Xdebug

Xdebug runs as a second PHP-FPM process used only for debugging requests, leaving the normal process unaffected.

To enable Xdebug, add the following to your [app configuration](../../create-apps/app-reference.md):

```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
runtime:
    xdebug:
        idekey: PHPSTORM
```

The `idekey` value can be any arbitrary alphanumeric string.

When that key is defined, Platform.sh starts a second PHP-FPM process on the container that's identically configured but also has Xdebug enabled.
Only incoming requests that have an Xdebug cookie or query parameter set are forwarded to the debug PHP-FPM process.
All other requests are directed to the normal PHP-FPM process and thus have no performance impact.

> If you have the [router cache](../../define-routes/cache.md) enabled, you need to explicitly add the Xdebug cookie (`XDEBUG_SESSION`) to the cookie whitelist. Depending on the cookies you already have listed there the result should look similar to this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have enabled the [router cache](../../define-routes/cache.md),
you need to explicitly add the Xdebug cookie (`XDEBUG_SESSION`) to the cookie allowlist.
Depending on the cookies already listed, the result should look similar to the following:
```

```yaml {location=".platform/routes.yaml"}
"https://{default}/":
    # ...
    cache:
        enabled: true
        cookies: ['/^SS?ESS/', 'XDEBUG_SESSION']
```

Xdebug has numerous configuration options available.
They can be set the same way as any other [PHP setting](./_index.md#php-settings).
For a full list of available options, consult the [Xdebug documentation](https://xdebug.org/docs/).

## 2. Use Xdebug

### Open a tunnel

> From your local checkout of your application, run `platform environment:xdebug` (or just `platform xdebug`) to open an SSH tunnel to the server. That SSH tunnel allows your IDE and the server to communicate debug information securely.

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
From a local checkout of your app,
run `platform environment:xdebug` (or just `platform xdebug`) to open an SSH tunnel to the server.
That SSH tunnel allows your IDE and the server to communicate debug information securely.
```

> By default, Xdebug operates on port 9003. Generally, it's best to configure your IDE to use that port. If you wish to use an alternate port use the `--port` flag.

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
By default, Xdebug operates on port 9003.
Generally, it's best to configure your IDE to use that port.
To use an alternate port, use the `--port` flag.
```

To close the tunnel and terminate the debug connection, press `Ctrl-C`.

{{< note title="On Dedicated Generation 3" >}}

> Note that because you have several VMs running, but your tunnel is connected to only one of them, your requests don't always reach the same host.

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
Note that because you have several VMs running but your tunnel is connected to only one of them,
your requests don't always reach the same host.
```

{{< /note >}}

### Install an Xdebug helper

While Xdebug can be triggered from the browser by adding a special query parameter, the preferred way is to use a browser plugin helper.

> One is available for [Firefox](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/xdebug-helper-for-firefox/) and for [Chrome](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/xdebug-helper/eadndfjplgieldjbigjakmdgkmoaaaoc).

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
Helpers are available for [Firefox](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/xdebug-helper-for-firefox/)
and [Chrome](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/xdebug-helper/eadndfjplgieldjbigjakmdgkmoaaaoc).
```

Their respective plugin pages document how to trigger them when needed.

> ## 3. (optional) Use PHPStorm

Reviewer: :clipboard:
```suggestion
## 3. (Optional) Use PHPStorm
```

The configuration for Xdebug is slightly different for each IDE.
The configuration instructions below are for PHPStorm/IntelliJ due to its popularity in the PHP ecosystem.

### 1. Configure Xdebug

In your PHPStorm Settings window, go to `Languages & Frameworks` > `PHP` > `Debug`.

> Ensure that the "Debug port" is set to the expected value (9003, or whatever you want to use in the `--port` flag) and that "Can accept external connections" is checked. Other settings are at your discretion.

Reviewer: :clipboard: : 
```suggestion
Ensure that the "Debug port" is set to the expected value (9003, or whatever you want to use in the `--port` flag)
and that "Can accept external connections" is checked.
Other settings are at your discretion.
```

![Xdebug configuration screen](/images/xdebug/xdebug-settings.png "0.6")

### 2. Configure a server

In your PHPStorm Settings window, go to `Languages & Frameworks` > `PHP` > `Servers`.

> Add a new server for your Platform.sh environment. The "Host" should be the hostname of the environment on Platform.sh you are debugging.

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
Add a new server for your Platform.sh environment.
The **Host** should be the hostname of the environment on Platform.sh you are debugging.
```

> The "Port" should always be 443 and the "Debugger" set to Xdebug.

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
The **Port** should always be 443 and the **Debugger** set to Xdebug.
```

> Ensure that "Use path mappings" is checked, which makes available a tree of your project with a column to configure the remote path that it should map to.

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
Ensure that **Use path mappings** is selected,
which makes available a tree of your project with a column to configure the remote path that it should map to.
```

## Setting up Xdebug

Xdebug is not enabled the same way as other extensions, as it should not be active on most requests.
Xdebug has a substantial impact on performance and should not be run in a production process.
Instead, Platform.sh runs a second PHP-FPM process with Xdebug that is used only for debug requests, leaving the normal process unaffected.

Enable Xdebug by adding the following configuration to the application's `.platform.app.yaml` file:

```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
runtime:
    xdebug:
        idekey: PHPSTORM
```

The `idekey` value can be any arbitrary alphanumeric string.

When that key is defined, Platform.sh will start a second PHP-FPM process on the container that is identically configured but also has Xdebug enabled. 

> Only incoming requests that have an Xdebug cookie or query parameter set will be forwarded to the debug PHP-FPM process. 

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
Only incoming requests that have an Xdebug cookie or query parameter set are forwarded to the debug PHP-FPM process. 
```

> All other requests will be directed to the normal PHP-FPM process and thus have no performance impact.

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
All other requests are directed to the normal PHP-FPM process and thus have no performance impact.
```
